What is Esterification?
The chemical reaction that takes place during the formation of the ester is called esterification.
Esterification is the process of combining an organic acid (RCOOH) with an alcohol (ROH) to form an ester (RCOOR) and water; or a chemical reaction resulting in the formation of at least one ester product. Ester is obtained by an esterification reaction of an alcohol and a carboxylic acid.
The chemical reaction for esterification is given below:


Figure : Esterification Reaction 

What is Esterification Reaction? 
When primary alcohol is treated with a carboxylic acid in the presence of sulphuric acid a compound is formed. This compound has a sweet smell. The compound obtained is called ester. The chemical reaction occurring in the formation of the ester is known as an esterification reaction.
CH3COOH + CH3CH2COOH → CH3COOCH2CH3
Esterification Mechanism
This process involves five steps. We have discussed the steps below:
Step 1: Cation formation


Step 2: Delocalized carbocation
Carboxyl oxygen gets protonated to give delocalized carbocation making the carbocation a better electrophile
Step 3: Transfer of proton
A proton is transferred to one of the hydroxyl groups to form a good leaving group.

Step 4: Formation of the pi bond
The hydroxy group’s alcohol oxygen atom donates a pair of electrons to a carbon atom which makes a π bond by eliminating water. The concentration of water is less than methanol, therefore, it is not a feasible nucleophile to reverse the reaction.

Step 5: Ester formation



Uses of Esters
Some common uses of esters are mentioned below.
Esters that have fragrance are used in perfumes, food flavourings, and cosmetics.
Used as an organic solvent.
Nitroglycerin is known and famous for its explosive properties.
In the manufacturing of surfactants like detergents and soaps.
Natural occurring esters are present in pheromones
The backbone of DNA molecules is formed by phospo esters.
Polyesters are used in the production of plastics


